# Multiple Active Spaces Approach Tutorial

The multiple active spaces approach (MAS) is a new method for defining the 
orbital active space for UKRmol+ calculations. It is based on a generalization 
of the occupation restricted multiple active space approach (ORMAS) and the 
generalized active space approach (GAS).

ORMAS and GAS were developed as a technique for pruning 'deadwood' CSF from the 
the configuration space generated by the standard complete active space (CAS) 
approach. They work by dividing the active space into multiple subspaces and
defining a maximum and minimum electron occupation for each subspace. ORMAS 
defines a local minimum and maximum, while GAS defines a cumulative minimum and
and maximum. It is often possible to reduce the number of CSF by an order of
magnitude or more with this approach while retaining chemical accuracy.

A second benefit of the MAS approach is that it provides a simple yet flexible
method of defining active spaces in general.

## Getting started

MAS can be used both for creating the orbitals in the initial quantum chemistry
calculation (ORMASSCF in Molpro and GASSCF in Molcas, I'll use MASSCF to refer
to both) and for specifying the active space in the following target and 
scattering calculations. It is also possible, and may well become the most 
commonly used option, to do the quantum chemistry calculation as previously 
i.e. CASSCF, and only use MAS for the target and scattering calculation.  

If you set the `'use_MAS'` and `'use_MASSCF'` variables to zero, or do not define 
them, then the scripts operate as they did before. However, MAS is 
now used under the hood for some of the pre-defined models, namely 
SE, SEP, CAS-A, CAS-B and CAS-C but not CHF models, or positron scattering for 
the moment. This was to extends functionality and fix bugs in a couple of the 
predefined models: 

1. Automatic determination of orbitals per irrep in the closed, active and 
virtual spaces also works for molden ordering, not just for energy ordering, if
Molpro is used. 
2. SEP and CAS-A are correctly implemented (in the old version some scattering
symmetries are in fact SE and not SEP, and CAS-A is simply incorrectly 
implemented).

The predefined models also provide a good illustration of how to use the MAS
approach to set up the active spaces, so in the next sections I will 
demonstrate how to set them up by hand.

The following examples are based off the existing H2O example (run in the Cs 
point group symmetry). Only the new variables for setting up the active space 
using the MAS approach are described.

Most of the examples below can be found in full form in the `examples/MAS` folder.

If you want to see the number of CSF and electron distributions produced by the
examples then the following script template can be used.

```perl
    #!usr/bin/perl

    use MultiSpace;
    use Data::Dump qw(dump);

    $nelec = 10; # h2o
    # $nelec = 42; #  benzene

    # Copy %model here

    my $target_space = MultiSpace->new({
        symmetry => "Cs",
        MAS => $model{'MAS'},
        constraints => $model{'constraints'},
        type => $model{'use_MAS'}}
    );

    print("\nElectron distributions for the target space:\n");
    my @dists = $target_space->distributions($nelec);
    dump(@dists);

    print("\nNo. of target CSF (singlet):\n");
    my %ncsf = $target_space->dimension($nelec, 1);
    dump(\%ncsf);

    print("\nNo. of target CSF (triplet):\n");
    %ncsf = $target_space->dimension($nelec, 3);
    dump(\%ncsf);

    if ($model{'l2_MAS'}){

        my $l2_space = MultiSpace->new({
            symmetry => "Cs",
            MAS => $model{'l2_MAS'},
            constraints => $model{'l2_constraints'},
            type => $model{'use_MAS'}}
        );

        print("\nElectron distributions for the L2 space:\n");
        my @dists = $l2_space->distributions($nelec+1);
        dump(@dists);

        print("\nNo. of L2 CSF (doublet):\n");
        my %ncsf = $l2_space->dimension($nelec+1, 2);
        dump(\%ncsf);
    }
```

For those familiar with the underlying UKRmol codes, electron distributions 
correspond directly to `nelecp` in the congen `&wfngrp` namelist, i.e. a 
particular distribution of electrons over the subspaces.

Details of the MASSCF and MAS spaces are printed to the log files. If Molpro is
used then a comparison table between the state energies used in the SA-CASSCF 
(or SA-MASSCF) quantum chemistry calculation and the target states generated 
from the MAS used in the target run is printed to the log files. In general, 
as long as the difference between the state energies is less than a couple of 
mHa there will be no appreciable difference in the scattering observables 
from a calculation performed with the full CAS and one performed with the MAS 
obtained by splitting the CAS into subspaces and restricting occupation. 

## Preliminaries:

It is wise to set `$model{'model'}` to something other than the reserved
model names \["SE", "SEP", "CAS", "CAS-A", "CAS-B", "CAS-C" \] it is probably
OK if you don't, but I haven't tested it. Also `'nfrozen'`, `'nactive'` and
`'nvirtual'` in the output dir name is no longer sufficient to distinguish
between different models as they can have the same `'nfrozen'`, `'nactive'` and 
`'nvirtual'`. The model name, which is also used to name the output dir, can be 
used for this purpose.

If you use MASSCF then you must use molden ordering i.e. 
`$model{'select_orb_by'} = "molden"`. With energy ordering there is a high
chance of shifting orbitals from one subspace to another during the re-ordering.

If MAS is used for the target and scattering run but MASSCF is not used for
the quantum chemistry calculation then all the variables that are usually set
to define the active space for the quantum chemistry calculation still need
to be set. I.e. `'nfrozen'`, `'nactive'`, `'nvirtual'`, and possibly `'frozen_orbs'`,
`'active_orbs'` and `'virtual_orbs'`. 

If MASSCF is used then only `'nvirtual'` and possibly `'virtual_orbs'` needs to be
set as the rest are determined by the quantum chemistry MAS.

In all cases `'nreference'`, and possibly `'reference_orbs'` still need to be set.

The MAS for the target and scattering calculation does not need to respect the
the type of active spaces defined in the quantum chemistry calculation. E.g.
orbitals that are frozen or virtual in the quantum chemistry calculation can
be specified as active in the target and scattering calculation. However, 
the total number of orbitals in the target calculation cannot exceed those
defined in the quantum chemistry calculation. One thing to note is that
any virtual orbitals retained from the quantum chemistry calculation that 
are not explicitly used in the MAS for the target and scattering calculation 
are automatically contracted with the continuum orbitals.

## Defining the target space:

First we'll look at the case were MASSCF is not used.

In the simplest models, all that needs to be done is to set up the target
space. The L2 space is then automatically chosen to be the target space with 
an extra electron in it.

### SE: Static Exchange:

Static exchange is described as following:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [4,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [10,10], "closed",
        ],
    )
```

or,

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            5, [10,10], "closed",
        ],
    )
```

A MAS subspace is defined firstly by an array specifying the orbitals per irrep
in the subspace, or an integer specifying the total number of orbitals in the 
subspace. If the second method is used then the orbitals are picked in order 
and the orbitals per irrep are populated automaticaly.  
Secondly by an array giving the minimum and maximum occupancy. This is 
cumulative occupancy for GAS and local occupancy for ORMAS. For the case of a
single subspace, ORMAS and GAS are identical. Thirdly, a string describing 
the subspace, this string is optional for target and scattering calculations
but required if the MAS is to be used to do a MASSCF quantum chemistry 
calculation (see MASSCF section).

### CAS-A: CAS + Polarization (single excitations - contracted):

If there are any target orbitals retained by `scatci_integrals` but not used in 
either of the target MAS or the L2 MAS then these are by default contracted 
with the continuum.

In the ORMAS approach:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            1, [2,2], "closed", # These orbitals are closed
            6, [8,8], "active", # Here we have 8 electrons in 6 orbitals CAS(8,6)
        ],
    );
```

And in the GAS approach:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 2,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            1, [2,2],   "closed", # These orbitals are closed
            6, [10,10], "active", # Here we have 8 electrons in 6 orbitals CAS(8,6)
        ],
    );
```

In the GAS approach the last subspace always has min. occ. = max. occ. = number of electrons.

## Defining the L2 space:

If you want a different L2 space, as you do in SEP, CAS-B and CAS-C, then it 
must be set by hand.

### SEP: Static Exchange + Polarization:

SEP models add single and double excitations to a set of virtual orbitals in
the description of the L2 CSF.

In the ORMAS approach:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2], # Closed
            [3,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [8,8], # Closed here, but will be active in the L2 CSF.
        ],
        'l2_MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2],
            [3,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [7,8],
            [7,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,2], # Virtual orbitals
        ],
    );
```

Note: The HF space has been split into two subspaces so that in the definition
of the L2 space we can restrict the excitations to be out of the second 
subspace only. 

And in the GAS approach:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 2,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2],
            [3,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [10,10],
        ],
        'l2_MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2],
            [3,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [9,10],
            [7,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [11,11], # Virtual orbitals
        ],
    );
```

The code ignores any distributions that don't fit in the number of orbitals 
available, and so, for example, you could write the ORMAS L2 space as:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'l2_MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,3],
            [3,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [7,9],
            [7,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,2], # Virtual orbitals
        ],
```

From here on I show the ORMAS approach version only.

### CAS-B: CAS + Polarization (single excitations - uncontracted):

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            1, [2,2], # These orbitals are closed
            6, [8,8], # Here we have 8 electrons in 6 orbitals CAS(8,6)
        ],
        'l2_MAS', [
            1, [2,2], # These orbitals are closed
            6, [8,9], # Single excitation out of the CAS
            5, [0,1], # and into the virtual orbitals
        ],
    );
```

### CAS-C: CAS + Polarization (single and double excitations - uncontracted):

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2], # These orbitals are closed
            [5,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [8,8], # Here we have 8 electrons in 6 orbitals CAS(8,6)
        ],
        'l2_MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2], # These orbitals are closed
            [5,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [7,9], # Single and double excitation out of the CAS
            [4,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,2], # and into the virtual orbitals
        ],
    );
```

## Applying further constraints

This is a generalization of the ORMAS and GAS approach to apply further 
arbitrary constraints on the distributions produced by ORMAS and GAS.

### PCO: Pseudocontinuum orbitals:

The PCO orbitals must be in the last subspace defined, so if virtual orbitals 
are used to improve polarization in the scattering calculation they must be
included in the target MAS, but with zero occupancy. For this reason contraction
of the virtuals with the continuum (CAS-A type models) is not possible.

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [2,2], # These orbitals are closed
            [5,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [7,8], # Single excitations from CAS(8,6)
            [6,3,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,1], # to PCO
        ],
    );
```

Constraints are necessary if you want to set up a reduced PCO calculation.
In a reduced PCO calculation the only CSF containing PCO are of the form 
GS^-1 PCO^1. To do this we need to split the active space so that the HF GS 
can be represented by one or more fully occupied subspaces, and we need to use 
some further constraints to ensure that PCOs are only occupied when the 
excitation comes from the GS.

Constraints are set by passing an anonymous function that operates on the 
distributions produced, removing those that you don't want. Distributions that
you want to remove should evaluate to false.

In the example below we simplify the constraints needed by not having any closed
or virtual orbitals:

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # == 0, don't use MAS approach. == 1, use ORMAS.  == 2, use GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [4,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,10], # HF when fully occupied ( These 2 subspaces together
            [2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,4],  # rest of the CAS          are equivalent to CAS(10,7) )
            [6,3,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,1],  # PCO
        ],
        'constraints', sub {my $dist = shift; !($dist->[2] > 0 && $dist->[0] != 9);},
         'l2_MAS', [
            [4,1,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,10], # HF when fully occupied ( These 2 subspaces together
            [2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,4],  # rest of the CAS          are equivalent to CAS(11,7) )
            [6,3,0,0,0,0,0,0], [0,2],  # PCO
        ],
        'l2_constraints', sub {my $dist = shift; !($dist->[2] > 0 && $dist->[0] != 9 && $dist->[1] > 0);},               
    );
```

note: when we use constraints we need to set the L2 space by hand, as the
code is not clever enough to derive `'l2_constraints'` from `'constraints'` 
on its own.

## ORMAS and GAS: Pruning the deadwood:

### Benzene example:

Here is the benzene CAS model from the ukrmol+ test suite.

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # 0 Don't use MAS approach. 1 for ORMAS.  2 for GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [6,1,4,0,5,0,3,0], [38,38],
            [2,1,1,1,1,1,1,1], [4,4],
        ],
    );
```

And here we reduce the number of CSF to about 10% of the CAS model

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MAS', 1,  # 0 Don't use MAS approach. 1 for ORMAS.  2 for GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [6,1,4,0,5,0,3,0], [38,38],
            [0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1], [3,4],
            [2,0,1,0,1,0,1,0], [0,1],
        ],
    );
```

Comparing target state energies between the two models, the largest difference
is about  1 mHa. The eigenphase sums and cross-sections show almost no visible
difference.

Note: Benzene is a very "easy" molecule to treat using MAS, other molecules 
generally require more complex divisions of the CAS, and more excitations 
between the subspaces than the example above, never-the-less, order of magnitude
reductions have been achievable in all the molecules tested so far, especially 
as the calculation size increases.

## MASSCF: Quantum chemistry calculations

Several quantum chemistry codes allow the use of ORMAS and GAS for
multi-configurational SCF calculations. This means that larger orbital spaces
can also be used to produce a set of optimized orbitals for the R-matrix
calculations. Molpro can do ORMASSCF (although it doesn't explicitly call it 
ORMAS) and Molcas can do GASSCF. Both have certain limitations when it comes to 
state averaging. Molcas can only state average over states of the same spin and
symmetry. Using ORMASSCF in Molpro implicitly changes the basis from determinant
based to CSF based, and state averaging over different spins no longer works.

A note on molden ordering: As far as I can see, Molpro orders the molden file
by subspace, then occupation number then energy. Molcas orders by symmetry
first, but within a subspace it is not entirely clear what the basis of the
ordering is. If the occupation is fractional then no energy is output, and
the occupation numbers are not necessarily in order. The strategy I took is to
sort so that the ordering is the same as for Molpro i.e.
subspace-occupation-energy, whilst preserving the order within a symmetry.
One consequence of this is that it is not possible to do a pure energy ordering
of the Molcas orbitals so ordering by energy is not available.

### ORMASSCF with Molpro

Setting `'use_MASSCF' == 1` tells the scripts to perform an ORMASSCF 
calculation in Molpro to produce the orbitals. This overrides the choice of
quantum chemistry code in `config.ukrmolplus.pl`. Optionally, by setting 
`'qchem_MAS'`, the active space can be different than the one used in congen. 
Whichever MAS is used for the quantum chemistry calculation must use the ORMAS 
approach.

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MASSCF', 1,  # 0 Don't use MASSCF. 1 use Molpro to perform ORMASSCF. 2 use Molcas to perform GASSCF
        'qchem_MAS', undef,  # Optional: Set if you want a different active space than used for congen.
        'qchem_constraints', undef,  # Optional (ORMASSCF only): Additional constraints for qchem_MAS.
        'use_MAS', 1,  # 0 Don't use MAS approach. 1 for ORMAS.  2 for GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [6,1,4,0,5,0,3,0], [38,38], "closed",
            [0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1], [1,4],   "active",
            [1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0], [0,2],   "active",
            [1,0,0,0,0,0,1,0], [0,1],   "active",
        ],
    );
```

Addtionally, each subspace in `'MAS'` (or `'qchem_MAS'`) must be labelled as 
`"frozen"`, `"closed"` (or `"inactive"`), or `"occ"` (or `"active"`). These are the names
that Molpro uses to specify the orbitals. In the current version of the scripts 
`'frozen_orbs'` and `'nfrozen'` actually correspond to `"closed"` orbitals in Molpro.
Currently, it should be ensured that the number of orbitals in these subspaces
are consistent with `'nfrozen'` and `'nactive'`.

Molpro allows some simple additional constraints to be set on the occupation of
the various subspaces. For each subspace one or more of the occupancies can be 
forbidden, but this cannot be dependent on the occupancy of other subspaces. 
For example,

```perl
    $model{'constraints'} = sub {my $dist = shift; !($dist->[1] == 1 || $dist->[3] == 1);};
```

but not

```perl
    $model{'constraints'} = sub {my $dist = shift; !($dist->[1] == 2 && $dist->[3] == 1);};
```

The state averaging is controlled, as in previous versions of the scripts, by 
setting `$model{'ncasscf_states'}`. For ORMASSCF this can be over states 
belonging to a number of different spatial symmetries but only one spin 
symmetry.

One thing to keep in mind is that orbitals are ordered by subspace, then 
occupation, then energy in the molden file. So care must be taken if the 
subspace division is changed after the quantum chemistry calculation (i.e. 
`'qchem_MAS'` and `'MAS'` are different).

### GASSCF with Molcas

Setting `'use_MASSCF' == 2` tells the scripts to perform a GASSCF calculation in 
Molcas to produce the orbitals. This overrides the choice of quantum chemistry 
code in `config.ukrmolplus.pl`. Optionally, by setting `'qchem_MAS'`, the active 
space can be different than the one used in congen. Whichever MAS is used
for the quantum chemistry calculation must use the GAS approach.

```perl
    my %model = (
        'use_MASSCF', 1,  # 0 Don't use MASSCF. 1 use Molpro to perform ORMASSCF. 2 use Molcas to perform GASSCF
        'qchem_MAS', undef,  # Optional: Set if you want a different active space than used for congen.
        'use_MAS', 2,  # 0 Don't use MAS approach. 1 for ORMAS.  2 for GAS.
        'MAS', [
            [6,1,4,0,5,0,3,0], [38,38],   "closed",
            [0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1], [41,42],   "active",
            [2,0,1,0,1,0,1,0], [42,42],   "active",
        ],
    );
```

Addtionally, each subspace in `'MAS'` (or `'qchem_MAS'`) must be labelled as 
`"frozen"`, `"inactive"` (or `"closed"`), or `"active"` (or `"occ"`). These are the names
that Molcas uses to specify the orbitals. In the current version of the scripts
`'frozen_orbs'` and `'nfrozen'` actually correspond to `"inactive"` orbitals in 
Molcas. Currently, it should be ensured that the number of orbitals in these 
subspaces are consistent with `'nfrozen'` and `'nactive'`.

No additional constraints are possible.

The state averaging is controlled, as in previous versions of the scripts, by 
setting `$model{'ncasscf_states'}`. For GASSCF this can only be over states 
belonging to a single spatial and spin symmetry.
